The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chemical warfare
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chemical warfare


Author: Amos A. Fries
        Clarence J. West

Release date: October 22, 2023 [eBook #71931]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: McGraw Hill, 1921

Credits: deaurider and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHEMICAL WARFARE ***




Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.




CHEMICAL WARFARE


                      _McGraw-Hill Book Co. Inc._

                        PUBLISHERS OF BOOKS FOR

                  Coal Age ▼ Electric Railway Journal
              Electrical World ▼ Engineering News-Record
             American Machinist ▼ Ingeniería Internacional
                 Engineering & Mining Journal ▼ Power
                 Chemical & Metallurgical Engineering
                       Electrical Merchandising

[Illustration]

                           CHEMICAL WARFARE

                                  BY
                             AMOS A. FRIES
                _Brigadier General, C. W. S., U. S. A.
                   Chief, Chemical Warfare Service_
                                  AND
                           CLARENCE J. WEST
               _Major, C. W. S. Reserve Corps, U. S. A.
                      National Research Council_

                             FIRST EDITION

                    McGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY, Inc.
                     NEW YORK: 370 SEVENTH AVENUE
                  LONDON: 6 & 8 BOUVERIE ST., E. C. 4
                                 1921

                        COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY THE
                    MCGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY, INC.




PREFACE


Shortly after the signing of the Armistice, it was realized that the
story of Chemical Warfare should be written, partly because of its
historical value, and partly because of the future needs of a textbook
covering the fundamental facts of the Service for the Army, the Reserve
Officer, the National Guard, and even the Civilian Chemist. The present
work was undertaken by both authors as a labor of patriotism and
because of their interest in the Service.

The two years which have elapsed since the initial discussion of the
outlines of the book have thoroughly convinced us of the need of such
a work. The Engineers, the Medical Department, and most of the other
branches of the Army have their recognized textbooks and manuals.
There has been no way, however, by which the uninformed can check the
accuracy of statements regarding Chemical Warfare. The present volume
will serve, in a measure, to fill this gap. That it does not do so
more completely is due in part to the fact that secrecy must still be
maintained about some of the facts and some of the new discoveries
which are the property of the Service. Those familiar with the work of
the Chemical Warfare Service will discover, though, that the following
pages contain many statements which were zealously guarded secrets two
years ago. This enlarged program of publicity on the part of the Chief
of the Service is being justified every day by the ever increasing
interest in this branch of warfare. Where five men were discussing
Chemical Warfare two years ago, fifty men are talking about the work
and the possibilities of the Service today. It is hoped that the facts
here presented may further increase the interest in Chemical Warfare,
for there is no question but that it must be recognized as a permanent
and a very vital branch of the Army of every country. Reasons for this
will be found scattered through the pages of this book.

It should be explained that this is in no sense a complete historical
sketch of the development and personnel of the Chemical Warfare
Service. At least two more volumes are needed,—one on the Manufacture
of Poisonous Gases and one on the Tactics of Chemical Warfare. We have
purposely refrained from an attempt to give credit to individuals for
the accomplishments of the various Divisions of the Service, because
such an attempt would have made the book too voluminous, and would
have defeated the primary purpose, namely, that it should present
the information in as concise manner as possible. The published and
unpublished materials of the files of all the Divisions have been
freely drawn upon in writing the various chapters, and many old C. W.
S. men will undoubtedly recognize whole sentences which they wrote
under the stress of the laboratory or plant “battle front.” May
these few lines be an acknowledgment of their contributions. Those
who desire to consult the literature of Chemical Warfare will find a
fairly complete bibliography (to about the middle of 1919) in “Special
Libraries” for November, 1919.

Special acknowledgment is made to Dr. G. J. Esselen, Jr., for having
read the manuscript and for helpful and constructive criticisms.
Many of the figures are reproduced by permission of the Journal of
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry; those showing the Nelson cell
were furnished by the Samuel M. Green Company.

                                            AMOS A. FRIES,
                                            CLARENCE J. WEST.

    Aug. 1, 1921.




FOREWORD


After all peaceful means of settling disputes between nations have
been resorted to and have failed, war is often declared by one of the
disputants for the purpose of imposing its will upon the other by
force. In order to accomplish this, a superiority must be established
over the adversary in trained men and in implements of war.

Men are nothing in modern war unless they are equipped with the most
effective devices for killing and maiming the enemy’s soldiers and
thoroughly trained in the use of such implements.

History proves that an effective implement of war has never been
discarded until it becomes obsolete.

It is impossible to humanize the act of killing and maiming the enemy’s
soldiers, and there is no logical grounds on which to condemn an
appliance so long as its application can be so confined. Experiments in
this and other countries during the World War completely established
the fact that gas can be so confined. The range of gas clouds is no
greater than that of artillery and the population in the area behind
the front line must, if they remain in such range, take their chance.
The danger area in the future will be known to all.

As the first Director of the Chemical Warfare Service, U. S. Army, I
speak with some experience when I say that there is no field in which
the future possibilities are greater than in chemical warfare, and no
field in which neglect to keep abreast of the times in research and
training would be more disastrous.

Notwithstanding the fact that gas was used in the World War two years
before the United States entered the fray, practically nothing was
done in this country before April, 1917, towards the development of
any chemical warfare appliances, offensive or defensive, and had it
not been for the ability of an ally to supply our troops with such
appliances, they would have been as defenseless as the Canadians were
at Ypres when the Germans sent over their first gas cloud.

This book recites the troubles and successes of this new service under
the stress of war for which it was unprepared and I trust that its
perusal will create a public opinion that will insist upon chemical
preparation for war.

I feel that this book will show that the genius and patriotism
displayed by the chemists and chemical engineers of the country were
not surpassed in any other branch of war work and that to fail to
utilize in peace times this talent would be a crime.

    WILLIAM L. SIBERT,
          Major General, United States Army,
             Retired.




CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGE
    PREFACE                                                         vii
    FOREWORD                                                         ix
    CHAPTER
            I. THE HISTORY OF POISON GASES                            1
           II. MODERN DEVELOPMENT OF GAS WARFARE                     10
          III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHEMICAL WARFARE SERVICE           31
           IV. THE CHEMICAL WARFARE SERVICE IN FRANCE                72
            V. CHLORINE                                             116
           VI. PHOSGENE                                             126
          VII. LACHRYMATORS                                         137
         VIII. CHLOROPICRIN                                         144
           IX. DICHLOROETHYLSULFIDE (MUSTARD GAS)                   150
            X. ARSENIC DERIVATIVES                                  180
           XI. CARBON MONOXIDE                                      190
          XII. DEVELOPMENT OF THE GAS MASK                          195
         XIII. ABSORBENTS                                           237
          XIV. TESTING ABSORBENTS AND GAS MASKS                     259
           XV. OTHER DEFENSIVE MEASURES                             272
          XVI. SCREENING SMOKES                                     285
         XVII. TOXIC SMOKES                                         313
        XVIII. SMOKE FILTERS                                        322
          XIX. SIGNAL SMOKES                                        330
           XX. INCENDIARY MATERIALS                                 336
          XXI. THE PHARMACOLOGY OF WAR GASES                        353
         XXII. CHEMICAL WARFARE IN RELATION TO STRATEGY AND TACTICS 363
        XXIII. THE OFFENSIVE USE OF GAS                             385
         XXIV. DEFENSE AGAINST GAS                                  405
          XXV. PEACE TIME USES OF GAS                               427
         XXVI. THE FUTURE OF CHEMICAL WARFARE                       435
               INDEX                                                440




CHEMICAL WARFARE




CHAPTER I

THE HISTORY OF POISON GASES[1]


The introduction of poison gases by the Germans at Ypres in April,
1915, marked a new era in modern warfare. The popular opinion is that
this form of warfare was original with the Germans. Such, however, is
not the case. Quoting from an article in the _Candid Quarterly Review_,
=4=, 561, “All they can claim is the inhuman adoption of devices
invented in England, and by England rejected as too horrible to be
entertained even for use against an enemy.” But the use of poison gases
is even of an earlier origin than this article claims.

[Footnote 1: This chapter originally appeared in Science, Vol. =49=,
pp. 412-417 (1919).]

The first recorded effort to overcome an enemy by the generation of
poisonous and suffocating gases seems to have been in the wars of the
Athenians and Spartans (431-404 B.C.) when, besieging the cities of
Platea and Belium, the Spartans saturated wood with pitch and sulfur
and burned it under the walls of these cities in the hope of choking
the defenders and rendering the assault less difficult. Similar uses
of poisonous gases are recorded during the Middle Ages. In effect
they were like our modern stink balls, but were projected by squirts
or in bottles after the manner of a hand grenade. The legend is told
of Prester John (about the eleventh century), that he stuffed copper
figures with explosives and combustible materials which, emitted from
the mouths and nostrils of the effigies, played great havoc.

The idea referred to by the writer in the _Candid Quarterly Review_,
is from the pen of the English Lord Dundonald, which appeared in the
publication entitled “The Panmure Papers.” This is an extremely dull
record of an extremely dull person, only rendered interesting by the
one portion, concerned with the use of poison gases, which, it is said,
“should never have been published at all.”

That portion of the article from the _Candid Quarterly Review_ dealing
with the introduction of poisonous gas by the Germans, and referred to
in the first paragraph above, is quoted in full as follows:

    “The great Admiral Lord Dundonald—perhaps the ablest
    sea captain ever known, not even excluding Lord
    Nelson—was also a man of wide observation, and no
    mean chemist. He had been struck in 1811 by the deadly
    character of the fumes of sulphur in Sicily; and, when
    the Crimean War was being waged, he communicated to
    the English government, then presided over by Lord
    Palmerston, a plan for the reduction of Sebastopol
    by sulphur fumes. The plan was imparted to Lord
    Panmure and Lord Palmerston, and the way in which it
    was received is so illustrative of the trickery and
    treachery of the politician that it is worth while to
    quote Lord Palmerston’s private communication upon it
    to Lord Panmure:

          “LORD PALMERSTON TO LORD PANMURE

               “‘HOUSE OF COMMONS, 7th August, 1855
    “‘I agree with you that if Dundonald will go out
    himself to superintend and direct the execution of
    his scheme, we ought to accept his offer and try his
    plan. If it succeeds, it will, as you say, save a great
    number of English and French lives; if it fails _in
    his hands_, we shall be exempt from blame, and if
    we come in for a small share of the ridicule, we can
    bear it, and the greater part will fall on him. You
    had best, therefore, make arrangement with him without
    delay, and with as much secrecy as the nature of things
    will admit of.’

    “Inasmuch as Lord Dundonald’s plans have already been
    deliberately published by the two persons above named,
    there can be no harm in now republishing them. They
    will be found in the first volume of ‘The Panmure
    Papers’ (pp. 340-342) and are as follows:

                  “‘(ENCLOSURE)

           “‘BRIEF PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS

    “‘It was observed when viewing the Sulphur Kilns, in
    July, 1811, that the fumes which escaped in the rude
    process of extracting the material, though first
    elevated by heat, soon fell to the ground, destroying
    all vegetation, and endangering animal life to a great
    distance, and it was asserted that an ordinance existed
    prohibiting persons from sleeping within the distance
    of three miles during the melting season.

    “‘An application of these facts was immediately made
    to Military and Naval purposes, and after mature
    consideration, a Memorial was presented on the subject
    to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent on the 12th
    of April, 1812, who was graciously pleased to lay it
    before a Commission, consisting of Lord Keith, Lord
    Exmouth and General and Colonel Congreve (afterwards
    Sir William), by whom a favorable report having been
    given, His Royal Highness was pleased to order that
    secrecy should be maintained by all parties.
                                  “‘(Signed) DUNDONALD

       “‘7th August, 1855’

                   “‘MEMORANDUM

    “‘Materials required for the expulsion of the Russians
    from Sebastopol: Experimental trials have shown that
    about five parts of coke effectually vaporize one part
    of sulphur. Mixtures for land service, where weight
    is of importance, may, however, probably be suggested
    by Professor Faraday, as to operations on shore I
    have paid little attention. Four or five hundred tons
    of sulphur and two thousand tons of coke would be
    sufficient.

    “‘Besides these materials, it would be necessary to
    have, say, as much bituminous coal, and a couple of
    thousand barrels of gas or other tar, for the purpose
    of masking fortifications to be attacked, or others
    that flank the assailing positions.

    “‘A quantity of dry firewood, chips, shavings, straw,
    hay or other such combustible materials, would also
    be requisite quickly to kindle the fires, which ought
    to be kept in readiness for the first favourable and
    steady breeze.
                                      “‘DUNDONALD

        “‘7th August, 1855’

    “‘=_Note._=—The objects to be accomplished
    being specially stated the responsibility of their
    accomplishment ought to rest on those who direct their
    execution.

    “‘Suppose that the Malakoff and Redan are the objects
    to be assailed it might be judicious merely to obscure
    the Redan (by the smoke of coal and tar kindled in ‘The
    Quarries’), so that it could not annoy the Mamelon,
    where the sulphur fire would be placed to expel
    the garrison from the Malakoff, which ought to have
    all the cannon that can be turned towards its ramparts
    employed in overthrowing its undefended ramparts.

    “‘There is no doubt but that the fumes will envelop all
    the defenses from the Malakoff to the Barracks, and
    even to the line of battleship, the Twelve Apostles, at
    anchor in the harbour.

    “‘The two outer batteries, on each side of the Port,
    ought to be smoked, sulphured, and blown down by
    explosion vessels, and their destruction completed by a
    few ships of war anchored under cover of the smoke.’

    “That was Lord Dundonald’s plan in 1855, improperly
    published in 1908, and by the Germans, who thus learnt
    it, ruthlessly put into practise in 1915.

    “Lord Dundonald’s memoranda, together with further
    elucidatory notes, were submitted by the English
    government of that day to a committee and subsequently
    to another committee in which Lord Playfair took
    leading part. These committees, with Lord Dundonald’s
    plans fully and in detail before them, both reported
    that the plans were perfectly feasible; that the
    effects expected from them would undoubtedly be
    produced; but that those effects were so horrible that
    no honorable combatant could use the means required to
    produce them. The committee therefore recommended that
    the scheme should not be adopted; that Lord Dundonald’s
    account of it should be destroyed. How the records
    were obtained and preserved by those who so improperly
    published them in 1908 we do not know. Presumably they
    were found among Lord Panmure’s papers. Admiral Lord
    Dundonald himself was certainly no party to their
    publication.”

One of the early, if not the earliest suggestion as to the use of
poison gas in shell is found in an article on “Greek Fire,” by B. W.
Richardson.[2]

[Footnote 2: _Popular Science Review_, =3=, 176 (1864).]

He says:

    “I feel it a duty to state openly and boldly, that if
    science were to be allowed her full swing, if society
    would really allow that ‘all is fair in war,’ war
    might be banished at once from the earth as a game
    which neither subject nor king dare play at. Globes
    that could distribute liquid fire could distribute
    also lethal agents, within the breath of which no man,
    however puissant, could stand and live. From the summit
    of Primrose Hill, a few hundred engineers, properly
    prepared, could render Regent’s Park, in an incredibly
    short space of time, utterly uninhabitable; or could
    make an army of men, that should even fill that space,
    fall with their arms in their hands, prostrate and
    helpless as the host of Sennacherib.

    “The question is, shall these things be? I do not
    see that humanity should revolt, for would it not be
    better to destroy a host in Regent’s Park by making
    the men fall as in a mystical sleep, than to let
    down on them another host to break their bones, tear
    their limbs asunder and gouge out their entrails with
    three-cornered pikes; leaving a vast majority undead,
    and writhing for hours in torments of the damned?
    I conceive, for one, that science would be blessed
    in spreading her wings on the blast, and breathing
    into the face of a desperate horde of men prolonged
    sleep—for it need not necessarily be a death—which
    they could not grapple with, and which would yield them
    up with their implements of murder to an enemy that in
    the immensity of its power could afford to be merciful
    as Heaven.

    “The question is, shall these things be? I think they
    must be. By what compact can they be stopped? It were
    improbable that any congress of nations could agree on
    any code regulating means of destruction; but if it
    did, it were useless; for science becomes more powerful
    as she concentrates her forces in the hands of units,
    so that a nation could only act, by the absolute and
    individual assent of each of her representatives.
    Assume, then, that France shall lay war to England, and
    by superior force of men should place immense hosts,
    well armed, on English soil. Is it probable that the
    units would rest in peace and allow sheer brute force
    to win its way to empire? Or put English troops on
    French soil, and reverse the question?

    “To conclude. War has, at this moment, reached, in its
    details, such an extravagance of horror and cruelty,
    that it can not be made worse by any art, and can only
    be made more merciful by being rendered more terribly
    energetic. Who that had to die from a blow would not
    rather place his head under Nasmyth’s hammer, than
    submit it to a drummer-boy armed with a ferrule?”

The _Army and Navy Register_ of May 29, 1915, reports that

    “among the recommendations forwarded to the Board of
    Ordnance and Fortifications there may be found many
    suggestions in favor of the asphyxiation process,
    mostly by the employment of gases contained in bombs
    to be thrown within the lines of the foe, with varying
    effects from peaceful slumber to instant death. One
    ingenious person suggested a bomb laden to its full
    capacity with snuff, which should be so evenly and
    thoroughly distributed that the enemy would be
    convulsed with sneezing, and in this period of paroxysm
    it would be possible to creep up on him and capture him
    in the throes of the convulsion.”

That the probable use of poisonous gas has often been in the minds
of military men during recent times is evidenced by the fact that at
the Hague Conference in 1899 several of the more prominent nations of
Europe and Asia pledged themselves not to use projectiles whose only
object was to give out suffocating or poisonous gases. Many of the
Powers did not sign this declaration until later. Germany signed and
ratified it on Sept. 4, 1900, but the United States never signed it.
Further, this declaration was not to be binding in case of a war in
which a non-signatory was or became a belligerent. Admiral Mahan, a
United States delegate, stated his position in regard to the use of gas
in shell (at that time an untried theory) as follows:

    “The reproach of cruelty and perfidy addressed against
    these supposed shells was equally uttered previously
    against fire-arms and torpedoes, although both are
    now employed without scruple. It is illogical and not
    demonstrably humane to be tender about asphyxiating
    men with gas, when all are prepared to admit that it
    is allowable to blow the bottom out of an ironclad
    at midnight, throwing four or five hundred men into
    the sea to be choked by the water, with scarcely the
    remotest chance to escape.”

At the Hague Congress of 1907, article 23 of the rules adopted for war
on land states:

    “It is expressly forbidden (_a_),
     to employ poisons or poisonous weapons.”

Before the War suffocating cartridges were shot from the
cartridge-throwing rifle of 26 mm. These cartridges were charged with
ethyl bromoacetate, a slightly suffocating and non-toxic lachrymator.
They were intended for attack on the flanking works of permanent
fortifications, flanking casements or caponiers, into which the enemy
tried to make the cartridges penetrate through the narrow slits used
for loopholes. The men who were serving the machine guns or the cannon
of the flanking works would have been bothered by the vapor from the
ethyl bromoacetate, and the assailant would have profited by their
disturbance to get past the obstacle presented by the fortification.
The employment of these devices, not entailing death, did not
contravene the Hague conventions.

The only memorable operations in the course of which these devices were
used before the War was the attack on the Bonnet gang at Choisy-le-roi.

In connection with the suggested use of sulfur dioxide by Lord
Dundonald and the proposed use of poisonous gases in shell, the
following description of a charcoal respirator by Dr. J. Stenhouse,[3]
communicated by Dr. George Wilson in 1854, is of interest.

[Footnote 3: _Trans. Royal Scottish Soc. Arts_, =4=, Appendix O, 198
(1854).]

    “Dr. Wilson commenced by stating that, having read with
    much interest the account of Dr. Stenhouse’s researches
    on the deodorizing and disinfecting properties
    of charcoal, and the application of these to the
    construction of a new and important kind of respirator,
    he had requested the accomplished chemist to send one
    of his instruments for exhibition to the society,
    which he had kindly done. Two of the instruments were
    now on the table, differing, however, so slightly in
    construction, that it would be sufficient to explain
    the arrangement of one of them. Externally, it had
    the appearance of a small fencing-mask of wire gauze,
    covering the face from the chin upwards to the bridge
    of the nose, but leaving the eyes and forehead free.
    It consisted, essentially, of two plates of wire
    gauze, separated from each other by a space of about
    one-fourth or one-eighth of an inch, so as to form a
    small cage filled with small fragments of charcoal. The
    frame of the cage was of copper, but the edges were
    made of soft lead, and were lined with velvet, so as to
    admit of their being made to fit the cheeks tightly and
    inclose the mouth and nostrils. By this arrangement, no
    air could enter the lungs without passing through the
    wire gauze and traversing the charcoal. An aperture is
    provided with a screw or sliding valve for the removal
    and replenishment of the contents of the cage, which
    consist of the siftings or riddlings of the lighter
    kinds of wood charcoal. The apparatus is attached to
    the face by an elastic band passing over the crown of
    the head and strings tying behind, as in the case of
    the ordinary respirator. The important agent in this
    instrument is the charcoal, which has so remarkable
    a power of absorbing and destroying irritating and
    otherwise irrespirable and poisonous gases or vapors
    that, armed with the respirator, spirits of hartshorn,
    sulphuretted hydrogen, hydrosulphuret of ammonia and
    chlorine may be breathed through it with impunity,
    though but slightly diluted with air. This result,
    first obtained by Dr. Stenhouse, has been verified by
    those who have repeated the trial, among others by Dr.
    Wilson, who has tried the vapors named above on himself
    and four of his pupils, who have breathed them with
    impunity. The explanation of this remarkable property
    of charcoal is two-fold. It has long been known to
    possess the power of condensing into its pores gases
    and vapors, so that if freshly prepared and exposed to
    these, it absorbs and retains them. But it has scarcely
    been suspected till recently, when Dr. Stenhouse
    pointed out the fact, that if charcoal be allowed
    to absorb simultaneously such gases as sulphuretted
    hydrogen and air, the oxygen of this absorbed and
    condensed air rapidly oxidizes and destroys the
    accompanying gas. So marked is this action, that if
    dead animals be imbedded in a layer of charcoal a few
    inches deep, instead of being prevented from decaying
    as it has hitherto been supposed that they would be by
    the supposed antiseptic powers of the charcoal, they
    are found by Dr. Stenhouse to decay much faster, whilst
    at the same time, no offensive effluvia are evolved.
    The deodorizing powers of charcoal are thus established
    in a way they never have been before; but at the
    same time it is shown that the addition of charcoal
    to sewage refuse lessens its agricultural value
    contemporaneously with the lessening of odor. From
    these observations, which have been fully verified, it
    appears that by strewing charcoal coarsely powdered to
    the extent of a few inches, over church-yards, or by
    placing it inside the coffins of the dead, the escape
    of noisome and poisonous exhalations may be totally
    prevented. The charcoal respirator embodies this
    important discovery. It is certain that many of the
    miasma, malaria and infectious matters which propagate
    disease in the human subjects, enter the body by the
    lungs, and impregnating the blood there, are carried
    with it throughout the entire body, which they thus
    poison. These miasma are either gases and vapors or
    bodies which, like fine light dust, are readily carried
    through the air; moreover, they are readily destroyed
    by oxidizing agents, which convert them into harmless,
    or at least non-poisonous substances, such as water,
    carbonic acid and nitrogen. There is every reason,
    therefore, for believing that charcoal will oxidize
    and destroy such miasma as effectually as it does
    sulphuretted hydrogen or hydrosulphuret of ammonia, and
    thus prevent their reaching and poisoning the blood.
    The intention accordingly is that those who are exposed
    to noxious vapors, or compelled to breathe infected
    atmospheres, shall wear the charcoal respirator,
    with a view to arrest and destroy the volatile
    poisons contained in these. Some of the non-obvious
    applications of the respirator were then referred to:

      “1. Certain of the large chemical manufacturers in
      London are now supplying their workmen with the
      charcoal respirators as a protection against the more
      irritating vapors to which they are exposed.

      “2. Many deaths have occurred among those employed
      to explore the large drains and sewers of London
      from exposure to sulphuretted hydrogen, etc. It may
      be asserted with confidence that fatal results from
      exposure to the drainage gases will cease as soon as
      the respirator is brought into use.

      “3. In districts such as the Campagna of Rome, where
      malaria prevails and to travel during night or to
      sleep in which is certainly followed by an attack of
      dangerous and often fatal ague, the wearing of the
      respirator even for a few hours may be expected to
      render the marsh poison harmless.

      “4. Those, who as clergymen, physicians or legal
      advisers, have to attend the sick-beds of sufferers
      from infectious disorders, may, on occasion, avail
      themselves of the protection afforded by Dr.
      Stenhouse’s instrument during their intercourse with
      the sick.

      “5. The longing for a short and decisive war has led
      to the invention of ‘a suffocating bombshell,’ which
      on bursting, spreads far and wide an irrespirable or
      poisonous vapor; one of the liquids proposed for the
      shell is the strongest ammonia, and against this it
      is believed that the charcoal respirator may defend
      our soldiers. As likely to serve this end, it is at
      present before the Board of Ordnance.

      “Dr. Wilson stated, in conclusion, that Dr. Stenhouse
      had no interest but a scientific one in the success of
      the respirators. He had declined to patent them, and
      desired only to apply his remarkable discoveries to the
      abatement of disease and death. Charcoal had long been
      used in filters to render poisonous water wholesome; it
      was now to be employed to filter poisonous air.”